You know, if you're building a
vertically integrated robotic solution,
maybe you can go deep. But our ambition
is to be the embodied AI foundation
model for all of the best fleets and
manufacturers around the world. And uh
and you know, to do that, you know,
unless we want to overload the company
by building a separate neural network
for each application, we need to be able
to generalize. We need to be able to
immortise our cost over one large
intelligence um and to be able to very
quickly adapt to each different
application that our customers [music]
care about. That's what what we're
trying to push.
>> [music]
>> Today we're talking with Alex Kendall,
CEO of Wave about the shift from
software 1.0 to 2.0 or from classical
machine learning to end neural networks
in autonomous driving. Wave sells an
autonomous driving stack to auto OEMs
similar to Tesla FSD, but for non-Tesla
automobiles. Major car manufacturers
globally like Nissan are choosing Wave
to power their AV stacks. Alex started
Wave back in 2017 when most self-driving
software stacks were massive handcoded
C++ code bases covering every possible
edge case like navigating around double
parked cars. Alex bet the farm from the
beginning on an endto-end neural net
approach to self-driving and on the use
of synthetic data and world models as
the ultimate path to generalization and
scaling today that architecture is
reshaping AV and all of physical AI
including robotics. Enjoy the show.
>> Alex, thanks for joining us on the show.
>> Hey Pat. Hey Sonia.
>> One of the things that is very special
about your company is that it sort of
typifies AV2.0 0 meaning a new
architectural approach that I think is
kind of demonstrated to be superior to
the AV1.0 approach that people toiled
with for so many years. Can we just
start by defining what was AV 1.0? What
is EV2.0?
>> For sure. When we started the company in
2017, the opening uh pitch in our seed
deck was all about the classical
robotics approach at the time was to
take a perception, planning, mapping,
control, essentially break down the
autonomy problem into a bunch of
different components and largely
handgineer them. And our pitch was that
okay uh we think that the future of
robotics is not going to be a system
that's handgineered to drive with a lot
of infrastructure like high
definitionition maps but instead uh we
thought that the future of robots would
be intelligent machines that have the
onboard intelligence to make their own
decisions. And of course the best way we
know how to build an AI system is with
end toend deep learning. So for the last
10 years we've been um promoting an
approach a next generation approach AV
2.0 know that replaces that stack with
one end to end neural network. Now, of
course, uh uh that may seem more um
obvious today, but it was it has been
contrarian for for many many years, but
I think today it's maybe unfair to make
that uh they make that basic distinction
because of course, you know, anyone
who's worth a grain of salt will use
deep learning in various parts of the
stack. But what you see in more um
incumbent solutions to autonomous
driving is of course deep learning for
perception and maybe for each different
component but still a lot of hand
interfaces, still a lot of
infrastructure on high efficient maps
and um perhaps you know reliance on a
lot of hardware. Um so our solution is
is is um you know still somewhat moved
on but today rather than just being an
end to network today of course we start
to talk about foundation models. you
talk to start to talk about more of a
general purpose intelligence, one that
can um understand not just how to drive
that car but many cars with different
sensor architectures with different use
cases. And so really it it all boils
down to how do we build the most
intelligent um robot that can scale uh
without needing um ownorous
infrastructure.
>> So Wave is sensor inputs,
motion output,
gigantic neural net in the middle.
>> That's right. at a very a very
[laughter] a very um uh uh simple level.
But some of the interesting things you
see that are maybe different from the
story we've all heard with large
language models is with autonomous
driving of course there are some some
interesting new factors. One is uh of
course safety. The system we need to
make sure is safe by design. And what
that means is that you know we can't
just pump more data in and and hope that
hallucinations go away. But we need to
design a a a architecture that is still
end to-end data driven but is um is both
functionally safe and we can build a a
robust uh behavioral safety case. Um so
that introduces some interesting um
architectural challenges and then of
course we also need to run real time on
board a robot on board a vehicle. Uh and
so dealing with the onboard compute and
onboard sensor uh limitations uh make
make it an interesting challenge. But
yes, it's the the same narrative we're
seeing playing out in robotics that
we've seen play out in all these other
AI fields like like language or gameplay
agents. It's that [snorts] an end to-end
data learn solution is out competing
anything we can handcode. And uh what
we're excited to be pioneering is that
that exact same narrative here in
robotics and autonomous vehicles.
>> And when you guys started this in 2017
and it was a very contrarian approach
when people from the industry said,
"Well, that'll never work because how
did they finish that sentence?
Uh I I could count hundreds of those
[laughter] footings. Uh yeah, typical
arguments were look uh it's not safe. Um
it's uh it's not interpretable. Can't
understand what it's what's it's doing
or uh even simply um uh it doesn't make
sense. We we haven't heard of this this
AI thing. Um and look, I think 5 10
years ago, it was probably reasonable to
say end to end deep learning wasn't
interpretable. But I I don't think
that's true today. I think today we have
a lot of really great tools for
understanding and responding to to
insights about um the way these um uh
deep learning systems reason. Uh but
moreover I think if you have the
ambition to build any intelligent
machine um I think it's naive to think
you can build a complex intelligent
machine and actually make it um you know
let's say strictly interpretable to the
point where you can point to a single
line of code or a single thing that that
causally made the outcome occur. the the
beauty of intelligent machines is that
they are so um wonderfully complex and
there I think the way that um we're
going to not just design them but
understand them is through a datadriven
structure.
>> Can you say more about the before and
after of the AV 1.0 stack and the you
know millions billions of lines of of
code that that goes into those systems
uh versus the 2.0 systems today? Um, and
how how quickly is that changing?
Because my sense is that deep learning,
large neural nets hitting hitting the
physical economy is a much more recent
phenomenon than people might appreciate.
>> Well, especially when you think about uh
the path to distribution and deploying
these systems. I mean, the automotive
industry has just gone through a a
seismic shift in bringing out
softwaredefined vehicles and the right
hardware on these cars to be able to
make them drive. Um maybe one uh common
uh point of debate is is is it camera
only or camera radar LAR as a as a
sensor approach to autonomy and um uh
just to be clear on on on our position
Wave we we want to build an AI that can
understand all kinds of different sensor
architectures. There's going to be
sometimes where a camera only solution
makes sense sometimes where camera radar
LAR and we train our um our embodied AI
model on all of those permutations from
very diverse data sources. And uh the
car we just drove in is a a camera only
stack. We've got other cars that we work
on with partners that have radar and
LAR. Uh and of course there's there's
different trade-offs that you you you
you take there. But more generally,
we're seeing mass-produced cars from the
best manufacturers around the world have
a GPU on board, have surround camera,
surround radar, and sometimes a front
lighter. And what's beautiful about that
is there's now the opportunity to see
this AI come out and benefit people
around the world. I think that kind of
um softwaredefined infrastructure is
happening in automotive has perhaps not
yet happened to the same degree in other
robotics verticals but I'm sure uh the
market's going to move that way as well.
And in general um having the right level
of comput infrastructure in a scalable
way and opening up these platforms to AI
I think is is what's you know really
making this possible and that's gone
through a tipping point in the last
couple of years.
>> And you know your your perspective of
AV2.0 though has flipped from contrarian
to I'd say consensus
>> maybe in the last two or three years.
Was do you think it was FSD12 that did
it or what when did that mindset start
to shift?
>> I miss uh I miss the contrarian day but
uh [laughter] even today I I still I was
in a conversation this morning where I
still see a lot of uh a lot of folks
still say yes we need end to end AI.
they've brought the, you know, the big
tech narrative around the future of AI,
but they say things like we need end to
end AI with with hard constraints or
with safety guarantees and and still
there's there's there still can be some
um you know belief that some hybrid
approach is the way to go where uh where
you want to try and try and take a
rulesbased stack and an end toend learn
stack but often these approaches can get
the worst of both worlds or just add
cost and complexity. M
>> so um you know I still think there is a
distribution in the market of those that
are leaning in and moving fast and those
that are you know are perhaps you know
have some some catching up to do. Um but
of course crediting the the breakthrough
that all of us that have been working in
deep learning that that really made this
world changing and mainstream of course
have got to credit the large language
model breakthroughs. Um I think they've
they've inspired the world and opened up
the market's mind to be curious about
this technology. Um but also what we've
been doing at Wave, you know, a year ago
we were just driving in central London.
Central London, I think, is a great um
proving ground because it's this
unstructured, incredibly complex and
dynamic city uh uh that our AIS learned
to navigate around very um smoothly,
safely, and and and reliably. But in the
last year, we've taken it to highways,
to Europe, Japan, North America. Our
cars were in New York City last week um
driving around there. And so bringing it
global, being able to take it to
different manufacturers vehicles uh and
show a product-like experience um this
this growth is I I think also really um
you really opened up a lot of
inspiration around around the world.
>> Why is it that you're able to launch in
hundreds of cities worldwide and you
know some of the AV1.0 companies need to
actually go out and build build an HD
map. just say a word on on on the
difference and how technical differences
are actually leading to uh differences
how the machine's able to learn and how
you're able to roll out.
>> Autonomous driving is is all about
generalization. Generalization means
being able to uh reason about or
understand something you've never seen
before. Every time you go for a drive,
you're going to see something new for
the first time. Um uh what did we see
today? We saw a a road worker rolling
out some carpet thing in front of the
road but you know on a pedestrian
crossing but not wanting to step out and
we had to reason about could we pass
them uh without without yielding for
example. You know there's just a example
from earlier today but you could uh
think about all the new things you see
on the roads every time you drive.
You're never going to see every
experience in your training data.
>> Yeah.
>> So that means that you have to be able
to reason and generalize to things you
haven't seen before to be safe to be
useful around the world. And that's what
has motivated our our entire approach.
So whether it's us uh a manufacturer
giving us one of their vehicles and
within a couple of months us being able
to to drive it on the road. A couple of
weeks ago um uh in uh September this
year, we unveiled a a vehicle to media
uh with Nissan in in Tokyo. Just four
months earlier uh was the first time
we'd even driven in Tokyo and got hands
on this vehicle. 4 months later, we were
having media drive in the car,
experience it, and that was a new
country and a new vehicle for us. So,
what that showed is that our AI was able
to generalize. It's trained on very
diverse data from around the world. It's
trained on diverse sensor sets,
vehicles, and so it's un able to
understand that that vehicle's new
sensor distribution, and of course, the
complexity of driving around in central
Tokyo. Um, so I think that's a really
great demonstration of of
generalization. And if if we think
about, you know, if you're building a
vertically integrated robotic solution,
maybe you can go deep. But our ambition
is to be the embodied AI foundation
model for all of the best fleets and
manufacturers around the world. And uh
and you know, to do that, you know,
unless we want to overload the company
by building a separate neural network
for each application, we need to be able
to generalize. We need to be able to
immortize our cost over one large
intelligence um and to be able to very
quickly adapt to each different
application that our customers care
about. Um that's what what we're trying
to push. You mentioned reasoning in
there in terms of how the model is
reasoning through you know as
construction worker what do I do now uh
in the LLM world obviously reasoning is
its own separate track of lots of
scaling inference time computes
techniques are you deliberately training
your models to reason is an emergent
property emergent behavior of the models
like say more about what you mean about
reasoning
>> we are and I think reasoning in the
physical world can be really well
expressed as a world model Um in 2018 we
put our very first world model approach
uh on the road. It was a very small uh
100,000 parameter neural network that
could um simulate a 30x3 pixel image of
a road in front of us. Uh but we were
able to use it as this internal
simulator to train a modelbased
reinforcement learning algorithm. Uh
there's a a fun blog post if you want to
see the history on that. But fast
forward to today uh and we've developed
GIA. It's a um full generative world
model that's able to simulate multiple
camera and sensors and very rich and
diverse environments. You can control it
and prompt the different agents or scene
in it. And um and that's an example of
reasoning where uh we can train in the
ability to simulate how um the world
works and what's going to happen next.
What happens when you bring this kind of
uh representation on the road is you get
some really nice emergent behavior. Like
today when we saw we were driving around
unprotected turns that were included,
you saw the car nudge forward until it
could see for itself and then completed
the turn.
>> Y
>> or when it's foggy in London, um you see
the car slow down and and uh you know
drive to what it can reason about. Um
and by training it with that level of
understanding, it it gives that that
level of emergent behavior uh that helps
it really understand particularly
complex multi- aent scenarios. I think
that's key for uh for getting safe and
smooth autonomous driving.
>> So the world models are really key to
teaching the model how to reason through
through new scenarios.
>> 100%.
>> You mentioned earlier the diversity of
your data. Say a word about where all
the data comes from. It's it's becoming
like an enormous amount of data because
of course uh unlike the language domain
or image domain when we're dealing with
um you know typical self-driving car
that has a dozen multiple megapixel
cameras um radar maybe a LAR you know
you're dealing with when you aggregate
that up it's very quickly tens or
hundreds of pabytes of data. Um so it's
it's an enormous amount of data you have
to train on but it's the diversity
that's really key and we've solved for
diversity in two ways. The first one is
by um becoming a trusted partner across
the industry and aggregating data across
many different sources from dash cams to
fleets to manufacturers to to robot
operators. And the second one is being
able to filter and and really understand
the data. Um uh here we've really worked
hard to develop different uh
unsupervised learning techniques to be
able to cluster and find unusual or
anomaly uh experiences. Um and of course
find the scenarios that our system is is
performing poorly at and then drive the
learning curriculum on those. Um but
yeah, today we we learn from a diverse
set of of vehicles uh a diverse set of
sensor architectures of countries. Um,
and that's that's really one of the key
things that drives the level of
generalization.
>> Does the increased growth of world
models and, you know, simulated data,
does that mean that you just don't need
as many actual onroad miles? I
>> I think there's two sides to to to that
question, right? On the one side, yes,
efficiency efficiency really matters,
but the second, you can't only rely on
learning efficiency. Um, at the limit,
if we take our current approach and just
scale it up, I'm I'm sure it'll produce
generic level five driving, um, uh, you
know, at the limit, if you have
unlimited training data, this is really
just a lookup data table with, uh, some
some prior experience. But that's not
economically or technically feasible.
And so the question is, how can you
train this to be the most efficient uh,
data efficient system? Because I think
efficiency will lead to not just
improved cost, but faster time to market
and more intelligence. So um uh
efficiency comes from a number of
different factors. There's uh most
importantly how the data curriculum you
put in place but then the the learning
algorithms. How do you magnify the
learning you have? And I think world
models are a really great opportunity
for that. They generate synthetic data
and synthetic understanding that doesn't
replace real world data but it
recombines it and magnifies it in new
ways. It lets you pull in interesting
insights and um and I think these kind
of approaches can can really really
improve data efficiency. But across the
board um I think working under resource
constraints um has forced our team uh to
to develop so many innovations. But I'd
also call out just the the workflow
because in traditional robotics when
you're tuning parameters or algorithms
or designing um geometric maps and
things like this, you know, there's very
wellestablished cultures and workflows.
you know, our team when we have 50 model
developers working on one main
production model or when we have um you
know an end to end net that we need to
understand and introspect or even the
way that we deploy these systems to
simulation or to the road and and and
feedback we've developed the entire
culture from the ground up at Wave has
been developed for embodied AI for end
to-end deep learning for driving the um
data infrastructure the simulation the
the safety licensing before we put
systems on the road um this is you know
this has not been a hedge or a side bit
for us but this is the entire essence of
our culture. Uh and I think doing this
under resource constraints and doing
this with um full missiondriven
conviction has has led to a bunch of
interesting innovations that uh look
getting to where we are today everything
is about iteration speed.
>> Yeah.
>> Speaking of your culture um I'm
picturing you know a bunch of AI
research types, machine learning
engineers, that sort of thing. How does
the culture of your organization differ
from similar
applied lab type environments
given the customer base that you serve
given that you're going after the
automotive industry specifically with
all of its quirks around you know supply
chain and all of its requirements around
safety and so how does that influence
the culture of your business
>> hugely uh in fact you know for the first
few years of wave uh you know we were
really a group of um passionate embodied
AI researchers but in the last couple of
years um I'm really really proud of how
our team has built out deep expertise in
um understanding the automotive industry
but also the ability to reliably uh
deliver to our partners there. And uh
that's a that's a different culture.
It's a culture I've really grown to
respect because when you're building
millions of cars uh uh you know the
level of reliability and um MTTF you
need there is is extraordinary. Um
>> what have you all learned from them? I
mean I'm sure part part of your job is
to teach them about what's going on in
the world of AI. What have you learned
from them?
>> I think some of the main things I'll
call out have been efficiency and and
reliability. The the difference between
technology in a product would be some of
the the main themes. Uh I mean the the
level of reliability required um but
also uh the level of of quality that is
seen to really robustly prove these
systems out before deployment and the
pride that these these companies take in
that uh has has been exceptional.
Another thing has been perhaps the the
sense of brand differentiation and the
desire for
>> um you know look uh do you do you want
your car to to to drive how can your
driving person personality really match
the brand's preferences?
>> How can you provide that that experience
that really gives um gives brand
differentiation and the great news is
that I think we've been able to riff and
brainstorm off these and come up with
some some really neat technical ideas
down down um uh you know down that uh
vein. But um yeah, ultimately safe, high
quality and um personalizable AI uh has
been some great feedback we've got from
the industry.
>> Can you talk about your path to market
actually in partnering with the auto
OEMs? How did you decide to do that? And
then how do you think the market
landscape will play out for how autonomy
rolls out?
>> Yeah, of course. Great great question
Sonia because since the beginning of
wave we've been focused on the pitch I
gave around end to end deep learning
being the approach to autonomy but we've
tried a number of different gotom market
approaches over the years but in the
last couple of years uh I've been hugely
energized about working and partnering
with the the biggest and best automotive
um consumer automotive uh uh
manufacturers around the world. Why is
that? Well, I mentioned how they've uh
begun to introduce software defined
vehicles. So they have the
infrastructure to work with autonomy.
There's the market belief that this is a
technology that can can really thrive.
Um and also it's the chance to get to
scale far beyond what we're seeing with
the the city bycity robo taxis we're
seeing right now. Um but moreover uh
these are OEMs that are investing in the
right infrastructure to go from not just
driver assistance but to um eyes off
autonomy where you can actually um you
know take liability for the drive and
give give the user a safe and give them
time back from their driving experience.
Um so that's awesome. I think uh when
you think about the market you know
there are 90 million cars built each
year. Um and and so you know some
manufacturers that are are building the
autonomy systems themselves like Tesla
build a couple of million but the vast
majority of the market um I think uh
there's an opportunity to partner to
work with some of these innovative
platforms um and to bring our AI to
market to make these autonomous products
possible and it'll only grow from there.
These manufacturers don't want to stop
at driver assistance. Uh we're working
together to build uh eyes off and
driverless robo taxi products. But the
key thing is that by avoiding
retrofitting our own hardware on these
vehicles by putting them in natively as
a software integration um we can move
fast at scale. We can build lowcost
vehicles that can be homologated all
around the world. I think this is going
to be the path to see um tens and
hundreds of thousands of robo taxis
rolled out around the world um at a at
an affordable price. And of course this
is all possible because of the level of
generalization um that that this AI
enables. Tesla FSD is just such a
game-changing product and you know my
friends that have it, it's just they
can't imagine driving any other way. And
so it's really cool that you're going to
empower, you know, the 88 million other
vehicles sold every year to to be able
to sell that experience as well.
>> 100%. Uh it's one of those things that a
lot of people jump in our car and come
for a drive with some being skeptical
about autonomy, but without exception,
they they step out with a smile on their
face. It's it's a magical experience.
Uh, and yeah, I I I can't wait for
people to be able to try it around the
world and make autonomy not just a robot
taxi tourism experience, but but bring
this experience to people uh in in uh
yeah, eventually every city.
>> What do you make of the sensor fusion
confusion debate? You know, the one that
plays out on Twitter every year or so of
Tesla gets confused if there's both
camera uh and and LAR coming in. Sorry,
radar.
>> I think it's the wrong debate to be
having. It's not the frontier question.
The industry is has really, I guess,
outside of Tesla, has really coalesed
around a common architecture of a
surround camera, surround radar, and a
front-facing LAR stack. Now, this costs
under $2,000. So, it's it's automotive
grade components, not the retrofit
rubber taxi components you see today.
Um, but having a Frontier GPU compute,
automotive grade GPU on the car and that
kind of sensor architecture is a a
really great platform to to build L3 L4
autonomy eyes off or driverless. It
gives you the necessary redundancy. It
lets you deal with edge cases that you
know cameras alone I agree they can get
you to human level but we want to go
beyond human level. Um and so I think
this kind of architecture is is
affordable, scalable, it's got the
supply chain for mass manufacturer um
and uh and it can uh eliminate I think
um you know eliminate all accidents and
and really drive superhuman levels of
performance.
>> Um so that's that's what we're seeing
many manufacturers uh bring out on their
vehicles and where we're integrating our
AI. Of course for a driver assistance
system um camera only can work for a
human level driverless system or of
course I should I should clarify 90
something you can look at different
stats but 95% or or above accidents
unfortunately are caused by human error.
So uh not only can you be human level
but you can eliminate a lot of human
attention and and accidents caused by
that but there are still accidents that
um to be able to solve would require
perception capabilities that go beyond
uh beyond vision. And if we want to
tackle that longtail um there are many
ways to solve it. One of the ways would
be to bring in um some other sensing
modalities by like radar and LAR. So um
you know we're excited to be working
with those kind of platforms um but
crucially natively integrated into uh
into the the OEM's vehicles themselves.
>> Is it the same neural net that can drive
on one OEM's car and another's car? And
how does how does that even work?
Because I imagine each vehicle has you
know slightly different positioned
cameras, things like that.
>> Uh it comes from the same family. So we
we train a a very large scale we we
regularly train very large scale models.
Um of course we iterate them on them
month. Uh but uh you know that's one
model that's common to all of the fleets
that we work with. But as you optimize
to a specific sensor set or a specific
embedded target of course you can start
to specialize the model. Um but the
beauty is that 99% plus of the cost and
the time and the effort is training that
base model and then we can build very
efficient um personalization to the
specific uh customer. And so this lets
this the scale but gives us the ability
to you know squeeze it to very efficient
real-time platforms and make it adapted
to a specific um a specific use case.
>> Are you gonna let Pat personalize a
super aggressive driver model?
[laughter] I'm gonna need to.
>> What driving style would you like Pat?
Yeah, pretty aggressive, [laughter]
>> safe, very safe. But, you know,
>> we can do that. We uh yeah, we we we
find it's really funny when you when you
build distributions around driving
behavior. Um yeah, you can you can
really tell uh from the human training
data we have, you can really tell when
it goes from being um helpfully
assertive, let's say, to uh unhelpfully
aggressive. And we can we can draw a
clean line there.
>> There you go.
>> What about you, Sonia? How was the drive
we just had?
>> Fantastic. It was it was it was
comfortable. It was it was safe. It was
and it felt very human actually like the
way it was kind of nudging up when it
couldn't see on the turn. It was very
human.
>> Yeah. Well, it's uh as as you know
complex as we can get in in Silicon
Valley, but come to Tokyo or London or I
was in the weekend in in downtown San
Francisco and um yeah, you really need
uh the ability to predict and reason
about other folks around you to be able
to drive in a humanlike way. Um and what
we find is that uh if you're not able to
smoothly go around double parked
vehicles or deal with um other dynamic
obstacles or even the prevailing row of
traffic might not be aligned to the
specific lane but maybe there's a
humanlike way of of driving then um you
know what's what's awesome about the
intelligence that we built is it's able
to reason about these things and keep
the traffic flowing, keep interacting
with road users in a very humanike way.
I think this is going to be key for
societies to accept and love robo taxis.
Um, I can't wait to make that a reality.
>> Are there any specific corner cases that
your cars have a hard time with today?
>> There are loads and it's it's uh uh
really hard to generically talk about
one because they're they're so rare.
Yeah.
>> Um, you know, if I was it's very hard to
say, oh, it's always these types because
it's always,
>> you know, a corner case is a couple of
edge cases coming together in a corner
and it's it's always confounding factors
when you get something really obscure.
But we're driving in 500 cities. And so
when you're driving at that level of
scale, of course, you see things that
you've never seen before. Road signs are
written in a new language. Um actually
maybe one way to to break it down is
often we talk about driving broken down
into safety, utility, and flow.
>> Yeah.
>> Safety being of course um safety
critical behavior, flow being the style
of driving. Is it smooth? Is it um
enjoyable? Uh and then utility being the
navigation and road semantics. And yeah,
>> safety and flow we found generalize
exceptionally well throughout the world.
We get almost uniform metrics in every
country we operate in in terms of safety
and uh um flow
comfort of the drive. But utility has
been the really interesting one as we've
gone global. How do you navigate? How do
you deal with road signs? How do you
read different languages? Um how do you
[clears throat] deal with different
driving um cultures? Uh and so that's
the one that's been interesting. But
from uh we we we published some some
results about this. When we went from
the UK to the US, we needed uh hundreds
of hours of data to be able to drive um
you know within in 10% of our frontier
performance. Um but then when we went to
uh Europe and to Germany, of course,
we'd already learned to drive on the
right side of the road. Coming to the
US, we'd learn to do right turns at red
lights. Then coming to Germany, we had
to learn to still drive on the right
side of the road, but of course, you
can't turn right at a red light there.
But then on the autoban, you'd like
this. Uh you need to drive, we drive
today up [laughter] to 140. Uh so uh so
pretty fast there. But um yeah, it gets
more efficient each time with
exponentially less data in each new
market because you've seen some of those
things before.
>> Yeah. You
>> you mentioned at the beginning that
large language models were part of what
flipped your approach from uh from
contrarian to to consensus. Are you
integrating large language models at all
into into your models? And I know some
of the robotics companies that are
getting started now are starting from
this VLA VLM base. Is that part of your
architecture?
>> 100%. In uh 2021, we started working on
language for driving. Um I remember my
team came to me at the time and and said
hey we should start a project on
language. I said no no no guys startup's
all about focus. Keep keep focused. But
they actually um gave some pretty
compelling arguments. So we we started
to play around with these things. And um
a year or so later we we released uh
Lingo which is the first uh vision
language action model. um uh in in
autonomous driving. And what was special
about this model was it could not only
drive a car uh see the world drive a
car, but also uh conversant language.
And it'll let you talk to it, ask it
questions. You know, what are you
finding that's risky? What's going to
happen next?
>> Uh or even it could commentate your
drive. And what's interesting about this
is that so there's a few benefits. One
is bringing language into pre-training
of course just improves the
representation's power gives you know
more interesting information to learn
from than than just imagery alone. Um
but then second aligning the
representation with language opens up a
ton of interesting product features. Uh
it enables a um you know you to create a
chauffeur experience where you could
actually talk to your driver. You know
no longer do you need a PhD in robotics
to understand the system but actually
you can just talk to it and and like ask
it to drive. Uh Pat, if you want to if
you want to race around the the the
commute um super fast, then uh you can
you can demand that. But then third, it
gives you a really nice introspection
tool where you can start to actually,
you know, you could imagine regulators
or um our engineering team converse with
the system in language to really
diagnose why it's doing what it's doing
or get it to explain its reasoning. Um
so I think these these these are really
clear benefits uh which which we're
really excited to be pushing.
>> That's super cool. And you're running it
on the embedded compute.
>> We are. So, we've put out demos that run
offboard. Um, onboard's challenging with
what's in the automotive market today,
but some of the next generation compute,
for example, the Nvidia Thor that our
nextG development vehicle is going to be
built with will be large enough to run
it on board.
>> That's going to be cool.
>> Very cool.
>> You you've talked about how autonomous
driving sort of provides a path to more
generalized embodied AI. Can you paint
that picture for us? how you go from
autonomous driving to humanoid robots or
whatever other things you might want to
uh embody AI.
>> I think we're going to be in the future
looking at a ton of interesting use
cases for robotics. Um what we're seeing
is that mobility is um becoming possible
I think much before manipulation.
manipulation is challenging uh in terms
of access to data, global supply chains
for hardware and actually even the
hardware designs themselves like I think
tactile sensing is still a a really hard
challenge
>> but inevitably it'll be a a massive
transformative thing but maybe you know
maybe is at the maturity of where
self-driving was in 2015 but today you
know our system is rapidly becoming a
general purpose navigation agent giving
it an arbitrary uh sense of view and a
goal condition it's able to produce a
safe trajectory. Um so I think we're
going to see a um rapid advancement from
not just consumer automotive robo taxis
think about trucking and other
applications but um you know this AI
will enable manufacturers and fleets who
want to build robots in in any kind of
mobility application. Um and of course
we we we're really excited to be working
with uh um you know frontier developers
and and applications over time as you as
you go out across that robotic stack. Um
and I expect we'll see more maturity in
the coming years from manufacturing and
manipulation use cases as as well. Um
but in the end I think the benefits of
having a large foundation model that
certainly in automotive we can I think
we have access to the largest robot and
data um supply chain and so we're we're
really lucky in that regard to be able
to push forward the intelligence there.
Um, but generalizing that intelligence
to new applications, I think there'll be
benefits from the model being able to
experience multiple different verticals
and it will only make it more more
general purpose. Um, any applications
you're excited about?
>> I mean, I'm I'm psyched to have humanoid
robots walking around.
>> Yeah, me too. I think um I I think
they're going to be neat. Uh, you know,
whichever form factor, I think humanoids
will play a big part. I think other
forms of locomotion as well and then
manipulation. there's some some really
interesting um uh challenges in those
space but I think the same story is
going to play out uh you know a working
on a narrow application you know like
when self-driving went to Phoenix
Arizona and put in a ton of
infrastructure and expensive hardware to
make it it work is is going to I think
have limited runway but working on
general purpose lean lowcost hardware
stacks um that really focus on making
the system mo most intelligent and
robust you know I think this is the
recipe for scale Um so yeah let's uh
let's watch that space.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you think there are major research
breakthroughs needed to reach kind of
physical AGI so to speak and if so what
do you think is the most promising
direction?
>> Absolutely I do. I think there's so much
more ground to scale up the current
approaches and we'll do that but uh uh I
think we will get compounding returns
from I always usually talk about four
factors that that that drive
performance. There's of course data and
compute um but then also the the
algorithmic capabilities and the
embodiment the what is the the hardware
and capability on the on the robots and
I think we need to push all four and on
the algorithmic side um there is so many
opportunities for for growth. I think um
a key one is is measurement. Uh how do
you actually uh measure and quantify
these systems? How do you respond
quickly, find regressions, be able to um
really have a simulator that that closes
the the the real world gap at scale? Um
and can run efficiently. Uh I mean, it's
no secret that these generative world
models are very comput intensive.
>> Um but having a good measurement system
will just drive efficiency and iteration
speed. So that's a that's a key one. Uh
people often talk about being a chicken
and egg. If you have a perfect
simulator, you've solved self-driving
and vice versa. And I I I really believe
that. Um I think you know AlphaGo showed
that when you have a perfect simulator
you can just solve problems through
Monte Carlo research. Um and so I you
know I I think that's going to be the
case in robotics as well. Um so yeah one
is one is measurement. Uh another pillar
is building more generality into the
model. How can you build out more
modalities uh and align those different
modalities in their reasoning? Um I
think this is going to open up um uh new
use cases uh particularly when it comes
to human robot interaction and
navigation. Um I was going back to the
utility problem uh before. Um some of
these things I'm uh I'm yeah I'm super
excited about. And then the last one is
just uh engineering uh efficiency. I
mean training these systems and the data
requirements is extraordinary. And so,
uh, I wouldn't understate, I think the
the most sexy part of this problem is
the, um, efficient infrastructure to to
to train and serve these models. Yeah.
>> Um, and getting that right. It's, uh, I,
yeah, I I think it's a real competitive
advantage or disadvantage.
>> We started by talking about AV2.0.
Someday, I imagine we might be talking
about AV3.0. What could AV3.0 look like?
If you go 5 10 15 years in the future,
are there any other big leaps in this
industry that you think we'll see?
>> You you said that with such dead pan
uh [laughter]
AV. So the the whole premise of AV 2.0
was all about putting the intelligence
on the car and not needing
infrastructure and a ton of uh you know
ton of overcooked hardware, but really
making the system intelligent.
Uh, and so I think we're seeing that
emerge now with the system that can
generalize to the world with all of the
onboard scalable um intelligence and
compute.
If I were to speculate where AV3 go I I
we haven't thought we haven't um sort of
thought about in depth uh lately but one
idea could be taking the intelligence
outside the car. So, I mean, when you
start to have, you know, majority
prevailing autonomous vehicles, you
could imagine a ton of new things you
could do when they start to communicate,
when they start to interact with each
other, you know, why do we need traffic
lights in the future if they can
coordinate? Why do we need uh, you know,
all these sensors if you can actually
just communicate with the AV in front of
you to be able to see around corners? I
mean, of course, I'm speculating here.
It opens up tons of interesting cyber
security questions, um, communication
latency questions, things like that. But
uh I don't know. I'm uh I'm all up for
embodied AI and um uh if we can build a
a safer and more accessible system by
taking the intelligence uh not only in
the car but but beyond maybe um maybe
that's a path. Let's see.
>> I think that's really interesting. If AD
AV3.0 know is the point at which it's
sort of a mesh network and you know at
that point maybe humans aren't allowed
to drive because they can't communicate
with the mesh network the same way that
the robots can and or maybe there are
special places that humans go to drive
just for recreational purposes but for
transportation you know it's all
autonomous
yeah interesting
>> how do you hire and how do you attract
people with how hot the AI market is
these days
>> I love that question because uh you know
at the end of the day our team is our
our product our team are are the most
important thing to making this possible
and um we talk a lot about at wave about
being a place where you can do the the
best work of your career and what that
means for me in embodied AI is having a
set of colleagues around you that um
inspire and excite uh world class in
what they do having the right resources
um the right culture unblock you um but
I think uniquely at wave we are able to
bring together really a frontier AI
environment with a near-term product
opportunity in automotive so if If you
want to work on intelligent machines and
see your system brought out with the
scale of impact of chat GPT in robotics,
um I think that's the this is a place
where we can do it. Um the other thing
is is that we've gone global. I mean we
have teams in uh um London, Stokart, Tel
Aviv, Vancouver, Tokyo, Silicon Valley.
Um, and you know, wherever there's an
amaz almost, you know, some of the major
AI and automotive hubs. Um, and you
know, we're really looking to to build a
global culture that can bring this
product to the world, work with
customers around the world. Um, uh, and
you know, and most importantly
collaborate with the the very very best
people. Um, yeah. So, anyone who's
interested in, uh, pioneering embodied
AI, pushing the frontiers, and actually
turning it into a gamechanging product,
um, come chat. I would love to speak.
>> Wonderful. Alex, you've believed in the
future for end to end neural nets in in
self-driving and in the phys physical
economy for for longer than just about
anybody. And it must be incredibly
fulfilling to see that vision start to
come to life. Congratulations and thank
you for joining us.
>> Thank you, Sonia. Thank you, Pat. It's
such a privilege.
[music]
>> [music]